CLDR-16918 kbd: respond to macchiati feedback (#3277)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/ldml/tr35-keyboards.md

### <a name="Compatibility_Notice" href="#Compatibility_Notice">Compatibility Notice</a>

> 👉 Note: CLDR-TC has agreed that the changes required were too extensive to maintain compatibility. For this reason, the `ldmlKeyboard3.dtd` DTD used here is _not_ compatible with DTDs from prior versions of CLDR such as v43 and prior.
>

> > To process earlier XML files, use the prior DTD and specification, such as v43.1 found at <https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr35/tr35-69/tr35.html>

Reviewer: **_[![image](https://github.com/unicode-org/cldr/assets/134902988/e0f1e6f9-ebd0-4406-9172-5ac3dd4d6d4b)]()_**

### <a name="Accessibility" href="#Accessibility">Accessibility</a>

Keyboard use can be challenging for individuals with various types of disabilities. For this revision, the committee is not evaluating features or architectural designs for the purpose of improving accessibility. Such consideration could be fruitful for future revisions. However, some points on this topic should be made:

1. Having an industry-wide standard format for keyboards will enable accessibility software to make use of keyboard data with a reduced dependence on platform-specific knowledge.

> 2. Features which require certain levels of mobility or speed of entry should be considered for their impact on accessibility. This impact could be mitigated by means of additional, accessible methods of generating the same output.

Reviewer 2: I am wondering if even this statement is too much. Implementations should be able to synthesize alternate ways of accessing these features with accessibility controls, so IMO it may not be necessary or even desirable to have multiple ways of accessing keys specified in a keyboard layout.

Author: This text no longer says "additional methods _such as adding keys to the base layer_." So an additional, accessible method could be synthesized, or it could be in the layout itself.  The point was just to note items tha tmight be of concern.

With that, does it still need revision?

Reviewer 2: I think the mitigation advice should be clearly directed at implementers, not keyboard authors. That'd be enough.

```xml
<keyboard3 locale="tok">
    …

>     <version numb  er="1"/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <version number="1"/>
```

typo?

**Syntax**

```xml
<info author="{author}"
      normalization="{form}"
      layout="{hint of the layout}"

>       indicator="{short identifier}" />

Reviewer 2: Why did you drop the `[` `]` which indicated optionality? Having that visible was really helpful I thought.

Author: it was inconsistent with other parts of the spec, and also led to the XML being not quite XML.  

Perhaps something like: `author="{author (optional)}"`

Reviewer 2: I guess. The square brackets were really clear I thought but consistency probably trumps that :grin:

Reviewer 3: I also prefer the square brackets and we possibly introduced them as I was fixing the keyboard LDML earlier. They should make the other parts of the spec match this one! :-)

_Attribute:_ `layout`

> The `layout` attribute describes the layout pattern, such as QWERTY, DVORAK, INSCRIPT, etc. typically used to distinguish various layouts for the same language.
>
> This attribute is not localized, but is an informative identifier for implementation use.

_Attribute:_ `indicator`

> The `indicator` attribute describes a short string to be used in currently selected layout indicator, such as `US`, `SI9` etc.
> Typically, this is shown on a UI element that allows switching keyboard layouts and/or input languages.
>
> This attribute is not localized.

* * *

### <a name="Element_names" href="#Element_names">Element: names</a>

Element used to store any names given to the layout.

> These names are not localized but are informative names for the keyboard. Localization of these names would be done as separate data items elsewhere in CLDR.

Reviewer 4: should be "unique identifiers for the keyboard". That is, they should be *keys* for localized names.

Author: These keyboards are independently produced by their own authors and don't necessarily end up in the CLDR repo. How would you propose to allocate and enforce "unique identifiers"?  

I think this could be a good discussion, but it seems like a new item - could you file a new ticket on unique identifiers? 

The locale identifiers are not required to be unique.

### <a name="Element_settings" href="#Element_settings">Element: settings</a>

> An element used to keep track of layout-specific settings. This element may or may not show up on a layout. These settings reflect the normal practice by the implementation. However, an implementation using the data may customize the behavior.

Reviewer 4: By implementations.

**Syntax**

```xml

> <settings fallback="omit" />

Reviewer 5: Without context here... what is `fallback="omit"` supposed to indicate?  It's here as an example, but the meaning of the example is unclear.

Author: Just below there: 

> Attribute: fallback="omit"
>
> The presence of this attribute means that when a modifier key combination goes unmatched, no output is produced. The default behavior (when this attribute is not present) is to fall back to the base map when the modifier key combination goes unmatched.

Reviewer 5: Ah, I must have searched the wrong side of the source for it.

_Attribute:_ `transform="no"` (optional)

> > The `transform` attribute is used to define a key that does not participate in a transform (until the next keystroke). This attribute value must be `"no"` if the attribute is present.

Reviewer 4: The **value** is the part in quotes, and does not include the quotes. X='no' is the same as X="no"

Author: I'm not sure what you are requesting then, could you use the suggest feature?

### <a name="Element_import" href="#Element_import">Element: import</a>

The `import` element is used to reference another xml file so that elements are imported from

> another file. The use case is to be able to import a standard set of `vkey`s, `transform`s, and similar

Reviewer 2: Noting that `vkey` has been deleted in another recent PR.

Author: yes, already fixed and merged in that PR. i'll be merging that into this one shortly…

_Attribute:_ `path` (required)

> If `base` is `cldr`, then the `path` must start with a CLDR version (such as `techpreview`) representing the CLDR version to pull imports from. The imports are located in the `keyboard/import` subdirectory of the CLDR source repository.

> > Implementations are not required to have all CLDR versions available to them, and an implementation may reject a keyboard file which references an unavailable CLDR version.

Reviewer 4: Would not support a keyboard that

Reviewer 3: @macchiati is that to replace "may reject"? then that is a stronger statement, yet more of a claim rather than instruction. Currently it reads as "implementation can inform the user about unavailability of required data and let him decide to go ahead with version that is available". If your intention is taht implementation shall not allow this, than it needs to be stated more explicity.

I would also change "all CLDR versions" to "all or any CDLR versions".

Author: I think it's still may, because it should be up to the implementation.

Author: i've already dropped the second clause.

> > Implementations are not required to have any or all all CLDR versions available to them. An implementation may reject a keyboard file which references an unavailable CLDR version.

Reviewer 4: "reject" is imprecise phrasing. Must not support? Must not allow the user to select? 
What does "unavailable" mean? Unavailable to the implementation? Non-existent?

Reviewer 3: > Implementations are not required to have any or all CLDR versions available to them.

We could just leave it at that.

Author: > "reject" is imprecise phrasing. Must not support? Must not allow the user to select? 
> 
> What does "unavailable" mean? Unavailable to the implementation? Non-existent?
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Jan's idea is to just drop the sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
> Implementations are not required to have any or all all CLDR versions available to them.
```

_Attribute:_ `path` (required)

> If `base` is `cldr`, then the `path` must start with a CLDR version (such as `techpreview`) representing the CLDR version to pull imports from. The imports are located in the `keyboard/import` subdirectory of the CLDR source repository.

> > Implementations are not required to have any or all all CLDR versions available to them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Implementations are not required to have any or all CLDR versions available to them.
```

But given the statement above "other than required standard import data from the CLDR repository", this seems disingenuous?

Author: The implied import data is required, so perhaps this should just be 'all'.

> This attribute specifies the physical layout of a hardware keyboard,
> or that the form is a `touch` layout.
>
> When using an on-screen keyboard, if there is not a `<layers form="touch">`
> element, the hardware elements can be used for on-screen use. However, a `touch` keyboard

> > cannot be used with a hardware keyboard.

Reviewer 4: There are fancy hardware keyboards that have software controlled keycaps

Reviewer 2: > There are fancy hardware keyboards that have software controlled keycaps

But generally they are still not touch keyboards with arbitrary layout -- they have a fixed hardware layout, and they generate known scan codes by position, no different to German vs French labelling on a traditional ISO hardware keyboard, where the electronics are identical, and it's just the text printed on the key caps that are changing.

Reviewer 3: "cannot be used" is not clear what it means, does it mean "implementations must reject" or "not guaranteed to work" or "undefined behavior"?

Author: I would expect this to be "implementations must reject"

Author: If the hardware keyboard is really a big touch panel, then it's more of a touch keyboard.

Reviewer 4: "cannot be used" and "reject" are both ill-defined (here and elsewhere). Is it non-conformant to use a touch keyboard layout with a hardware keyboard? Or is it just a ill-advised, because it cannot reasonably be interpreted in a way that would be useful with a hardware keyboard? 

And what would it mean for an implementation to "reject" a keyboard. I know what it would mean to have an application for a mortgage to be "rejected". But a software data structure? I could understand "must not use", but that also seems overloaded. If a touch keyboard layout simply couldn't apply to hardware keyboard, that's like saying you must not use a skateboard on a ski-slope.

Reviewer 3: > what would it mean for an implementation to "reject" a keyboard.

My interpretation of that is user tries to load a xml file into OS and OS says no, cannot use this file.

Reviewer 4: If you mean that, you should say it. But is that a hard requirement on an OS, that it "must say 'no, you cannot use "this file"'. And does that mean an application (non-OS) that supports keyboards can use it?

Reviewer 3: That is what I was asking in the first place...

My preference would be we leave that to whoever is trying to load the file. Perhaps they decide they can deal with it, perahps they decide it's safer to not attempt.

Reviewer 2: I think it's a little stronger than that. We deliberately designed the touch layouts to be completely independent of hardware layouts -- from scan codes on up. Attempting to jam a touch layout into a hardware layout through some algorithmic process may kinda work, for some layouts. But I want to avoid the expectation that this will even be possible -- it just doesn't really make sense and we shouldn't be leaving that interpretation open on the data model. And if we do leave it open, we may end up with implementers pushing back on more novel touch layout designs because it breaks their touch-to-hardware algorithms.

That said, I'd be happy for this to be expressed as a implementation recommendation or guideline if that's preferable to others.

Author: please see what you think of the current recommendation

> > When using an on-screen keyboard, if there is not a `<layers form="touch">`
> > element, the hardware elements can be used for on-screen use. However, a `touch` keyboard
> > may not be used with a hardware keyboard.
> >

Author: ```suggestion
> When using an on-screen keyboard, if there is not a `<layers form="touch">`
> element, the hardware elements can be used for on-screen use. 
```

there's already text below that says that the implementation may need to choose a different file. Doesn't make a statement about conformance.

> This attribute specifies the physical layout of a hardware keyboard,
> or that the form is a `touch` layout.
>

> > When using an on-screen keyboard, if there is not a `<layers form="touch">`
> > element, the hardware elements can be used for on-screen use. 

Reviewer 2: This is a little ambiguous. On-screen keyboard may refer to a visual representation of a hardware keyboard or a touch layout. Typically, the implementation would use the current hardware layout if it is intended to be a visual representation for user reference.

Something like:
```suggestion
> When using an on-screen touch keyboard, if the keyboard does not specify a `<layers form="touch">`
> element, a `<layers form="{hardware}">` element can be used as an fallback alternative. 
```

Author: Makes sense. and this is certainly a common use case.

> If there is no `hardware` form, the implementation may need
> to choose a different keyboard file, or use some other fallback behavior when using a
> hardware keyboard.
>

> > Because a hardware keyboard facilitates non-trivial amounts of text input,
> > it is recommended to always have at least one hardware (non-touch) form, unless a layout
> > will only be used in touch form.

Reviewer 2: The "unless" here doesn't seem necessary. Might be helpful to note that Android and iOS allow pairing of a hardware keyboard.

```suggestion
> Because a hardware keyboard facilitates non-trivial amounts of text input,
> and many touch devices can also be paired with a hardware keyboard, it 
> is recommended to always have at least one hardware (non-touch) form.
```

Author: sounds good (going with 'connected' as a more general instead of 'paired' even though that is technically the common case)

> - `ctrlR`
> - `shift`
>
> Note that `alt` in this specification is referred to on some platforms as "opt" or "option".
>
> Left- and right- side modifiers (such as `"altL ctrlR"` or `"altL altR"`) should not be used together in a single `modifier` attribute value.
>
>

> > Matching is affected by the set of available layers. For example, if the `shift` and `altL` keys are held down, `<layer id="A" modifiers="altL"/>` will match if there are no other layers which include `altL`. However, if there is also a `<layer id="B" modifiers="altL shift"/>`, then layer `B` will be selected because it is a more exact match.

Reviewer 4: Specify the exact algorithm that determines closest match.

Reviewer 3: I don't recall us discussing this and I am not sure it is a good idea. I would prefer if it was no match, no output. That's easy to understand and easy to implement. Otherwise it will get messy, what if there is `shift` only layer as well as `altL` only layer? Would you match `caps+shift` to either of them?  (If needed, we can introduce an attribute refering to a base layer to simplify reusing layers for different modifiers.)

Author: perhaps explicit match is a better policy then. We already said in committee that we weren't going to reuse layers at present.

Reviewer 2: Great catch. I'm with you @miloush. Disappointed that I missed this in my review!

We need to be careful with toggle keys (e.g. caps/num/scroll on US keyboards). Num Lock and Scroll Lock are currently excluded as available modifiers but conceptually the spec supports this, and if we ended up with another toggle key in future it could break keyboards if we are not careful.

Reviewer 3: Also note that the example @srl295 gave was easily achieved in the descriptive LDML using `altL altL+shift` (where space worked like _or_ and + like _and_). I am a bit concered that this is not allowed in the prescriptive one, where space means _and_. And since there is no fallback/base mechanism, people need to repeat the whole layer for each combination of modifiers. It's not a tragedy, just checking that it is intentional change.

Author: It was an attempt to simplify. Could be too simple, though.

Author: @macchiati and all, I'd like to take the modifier logic into a separate PR. So I'd propose to merge this section as-is and have a followon PR (keeping this ticket open) to sort out the modifier(s).

> - `ctrlR`
> - `shift`
>
> Note that `alt` in this specification is referred to on some platforms as "opt" or "option".
>
> Left- and right- side modifiers (such as `"altL ctrlR"` or `"altL altR"`) should not be used together in a single `modifier` attribute value.
>

> > Matching is done exactly. For example, if the `shift` and `altL` keys are held down, `<layer id="A" modifiers="altL"/>` will not match, but `<layer id="B" modifiers="altL shift"/>`will match.

Reviewer 4: The spec has <layer id="layerId" modifier="{Set of Modifier Combinations}">
However, since it is a set, `modifiers` (with an S) would be the right attribute name.

There needs to be a precise, algorithmic definition of "match". That is, given an input set of modifiers IS, and a list of lines of the form:
<layer id="A" modifiers="{ModifierSet1}"/>
<layer id="A" modifiers="{ModifierSet2}"/>
...
It should be completely determinant which one of those lines matches. Some of the spec sounds like

Also, there need to be a precise list of exactly what the modifier key identifiers are. It appears to be the following, but it is not at all clear.

- none (no modifier, may not be combined with others)
- alt
- altL
- altR
- caps
- ctrl
- ctrlL
- ctrlR
- shift

If on the other hand, the IDs are purely up to the developer, then that opens the door to (massive) incompatibilities.

Phrases like "If there is a layer with a modifier alt, there may not be another layer with altL or altR. Similarly, if there is a layer with a modifier ctrl, there may not be a layer with ctrlL or ctrlR." are unclear. Does that mean such a keyboard is ill-formed? Must it be "rejected" — whatever that means?

```
Matching is done exactly. For example, if the shift and altL keys are held down, <layer id="A" modifiers="altL"/> will not match, but <layer id="B" modifiers="altL shift"/>will match.
``` 

This makes it sound like there must be an exact match, so if I have modifiers="shift", that cannot match an input set {shift, caps}, and so on. Is that really the case? If so, I can foresee a lot of duplicate layers in order to express current behavior of keyboards. If not, then the text of the specification is wrong.

Is the desire really to treat unmentioned modifiers as "a don't care", but pick the line with the most matches?

Anyway, this needs a precise specification.

Author: I'd like to take this into a separate PR, merging the text as-is, leaving this ticket open to amend the modifier logic.

> - `ctrlR`
> - `shift`
>
> Note that `alt` in this specification is referred to on some platforms as "opt" or "option".
>
> Left- and right- side modifiers (such as `"altL ctrlR"` or `"altL altR"`) should not be used together in a single `modifier` attribute value.
>
> For hardware layouts, the use of `@modifier` as an identifier for a layer is sufficient since it is always unique among the set of `layer` elements in a keyboard.
>
> The set of modifiers must match `(none|([A-Za-z0-9]+)( [A-Za-z0-9]+)*)`
>

> > To share a layer between to modifier sets, the layer data must be duplicated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To share a layer between two modifier sets, the layer data must be duplicated.
```
